# Project
## Environment & Tools 
Window 10 pro, PyCharm 2021.2.1(Professional edition), Python 3.9.6,git version 2.33.0.windows.2 

## Purpose
The purpose of this project assignment I implemented a program is to demonstrate the understanding 
of the learning objectives of the course covered in the course's various modules.   

## Procedure
To fulfill the aim of this project, I have written a program for a cellular automation known as The 
Game of Life(Gol) conceived by the mathematician John Conway in 1970 to provide an elegant 
representation for how simple life can evolve which could be used as a model for cellular experiments 
in biology. The world of Game is made up of an infinite, two-dimensional orthogonal grid of square cells, 
each of which is in one of two possible states, live or dead. Each cell interacts with the eight neighbouring cells, 
which are directly adjacent in horizontal, vertical and diagonal directions. The simulation progresses through steps 
in time with each step representing a new generation. The simulation starts with an initial cell pattern known as 
the seed of the system. The seed forms the first generation and as the simulation progresses, each new generation 
is a function of the previous generation. The state of each cell for the next generation is determined by the state 
of it's eight neighbours in the current generation following the rules below.   
 1. Any live cell with fewer than two live neighbours dies, as if by underpopulation.
 2. Any live cell with two or three live neighbours lives on to the next generation.
 3. Any live cell with more than three live neighbours dies, as if by overpopulation.
 4. Any dead cell with exactly three live neighbours becomes a live cell, as if by reproduction.   

The general design for this project together with some inherent code for certain functionality was provided which 
include constant declarations for the cell states and methods to format output value for printing, update progress 
information in console, clear the console, get predefined pattern for the initial seed and the main program execution.
The task of this project is to complete the program by writing code for certain functionalities.
This program works as follows. The user can either provide the name of a file for this information to be read from or 
enter the desired world size, number of generations and the choice of the initial seed pattern. 
When the world size and seed are entered by the user, the world size is parsed and validated. If the world size is 
invalid, a default world size "80x40" is used. The seed pattern entered by the user can be gliders, 
pulsar or penta which correspond to predefined seed pattern that can be generated by calling the corresponding methods 
in the inherent code provided to generate initial seed population. If no pattern is provided or the entered choice does 
not match any of the predefined patterns, then the cell state for each cell in the seed population is determined by 
randomization. When the population is being read from the file, then the both the size and the population is 
provided in the file and is read, validated and parsed and if any part of the data is not the of expected type an 
error message is printed and program is ended.
After the seed population is generated, the population is printed and then the next generation is generated and printed 
the desired number of generations is obtained.

 
## Discussion  
This project definitely covered all sections of this course. It was very interesting and challenging. My greatest 
challenge was arranging my code such that it could be clear and readable. I achieved this by splitting the code to 
sub-functions using both inner functions and stand_alone functions. For example in  populate_world function, I used the 
inner function inorder to still  have direct access to some the outer function's local variable. In the case of the 
function load_seed_from_file where sub functions were many and long I wrote stand-alone functions to avoid overcrowding 
and too long functions. For code that I used more than once I also wrote a function to avoid repetition like in the 
case of the is_rim_cell and get_state_from_cell_detail function. The other challenge I had was figuring out the format 
of the coordinates. It took a while to realize that the coordinates obtained from get_pattern was reversed. I decided 
to use the same format for the whole program for consistency. I also need to take this into consideration when printing 
the populations when determining the rows and columns. For the function to read from file, the challenge was the fact 
that world had so many sets fo data with nested dictionary and list. it helped a lot with the validation and parsing 
when i the different parts to separate functions. it was challenging write the decorator. It took a couple of tries 
to find a good way to update current population. I solved this by having a variable outside the loop that is assigned 
the initial current generation and the updated with the new generation to serve as the current generation for the 
next generation. For the implementation for Grade A, the was a tip that file does not have an age attribute, 
and it is most appropriate to compensate for it in world update. I thought of checking if current generation has
age attribute and if not then it is added. But this will mean that this check will have to be done for every 
generation which is unnecessary, I felt it was best to add the key attribute when world is populated and when 
file is read, and I could not think of a reason why this will not be appropriate. The next challenge was getting the 
state of cell from world. Since the value of state vary from cell to cell and generation to generation, it became more
complicated to get the state after age attribute is added and state is not the only key. I solved this by getting all 
keeps and since there are only two keys, assign the key that is not 'age' to state.
Overall, I required a lot of logical reasoning and design apart from knowledge of available tools we learned from 
the different sections. It was a very interesting project to work with and the course material prepared us well for it.